#### Coursera - Data Science Specialization
### Getting and Cleaning Data Project

#### Course project: Processing Human Activity Recognition data captured with smart phones
#### Created by: Zammi Kahan

#### Content of the repository:
* Readme file - This is the readme file
* CodeBook - This contains the data definition, variable details, source information and other details.
* run_analysis.R - The R script used for the data cleaning, transformation and output data file generation.
* Tidy_UCI_HAR_Dataset.txt - Intermediate complete data file generated by above R script.
* Tidy_UCI_HAR_Dataset.txt - Secondary data file generated by the R script for average variable data.


#### R script run_analysis.R: 

This script is written for cleaning the Human Activity Recognition data captured with smart phones and prepare them for further analysis. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data. 

Data source: https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip

This script is used to:
* Merges the training and the test sets to create one data set.
* Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement. 
* Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set
* Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive activity names. 
* Creates a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and 
   each subject.

In Summary run_analysis.R is used for following processing and transformations.
* Download the source from the URL.
* Merge X_train.txt and X_test.txt data file using cbing (both the file structures are identical)
* Merge subject_train.txt and subject_test.txt data files using cbind.
* Merge y_train.txt and y_test.txt data files using cbind.
* Feature list is obtained from features.txt. Grep command is used to filter only "Mean" and "Std" features.
* Above filtered feature list is used to get the Mean & Dtd data from above merged data sets as well as set their column names.
* Then script does some clean up to the column names to make them user readable.
* Activity lables are obtained from activity_labels.txt file.
* All above data sets are joined to create a data frame to generate the cleaned data file Tidy_UCI_HAR_Dataset.txt.
* Aggregate function is applied on above data frame, in Subject & Activity level to get the mean of the columns. Resulted data frame is used to generate the file Tidy_UCI_HAR_AVG_Dataset.txt.


#### How to use the script:

Use following command: source("run_analysis.R")


#### Output generated by the script:

Tidy_UCI_HAR_Dataset.txt :
This is an intermediate result set, which contains the:
* Merged data from both "Test" and "Train" data
* Activity and subect for each row
* Description for the each activity and column names. 

Tidy_UCI_HAR_AVG_Dataset.txt : 
This is file is generated by the second independent tidy data set created with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject. 

